We're now standing in the boiler house where we have six Lancashire boilers that were installed
in 1927 to run the new winding engine. Each boiler held 20 tons of water and they were fired by two
tons of coal every 24 hours. So that's 10 tons of coal for five boilers. I say five boilers because
only five were ever kept in steam. One was always closed for cleaning. You would shut down the boiler,
drain the water out and before the fire actually went out men would be in there cleaning. It was a
dirty, filthy, thankless job and men would only be in the boiler for five minutes at a time.
One man would go in for five minutes, he would come out, then the next man would go in
for five minutes, he would come out, then the next man would come out, he would come out,
then the next man would come out, he would come out, he would come out, he would come out,
five minutes. The boiler had to be descaled, ash taken out and generally cleaned and it took six
weeks to clean a boiler. Once one boiler was finished, another boiler would be decommissioned,
the other boiler would be lit and so it went on. In the 50s then, late 50s,
there was so much gas coming out of the pit that they started doing methane drainage and using the
methane to clean the boiler. They started doing methane drainage and using the methane to clean
the boiler. They started doing methane drainage and using the methane to clean the boiler. So now
they became dual fuel. You could either run them on gas, or you could run them on coal.
It's a point of interest that probably before the colliery closed, they were running on gas and any
surplus gas was being fed into the grid. And they were probably getting more for the gas than they
actually had for the coal they brought to the surface. By this time coal was very difficult to
win at the depth of the grid. It was too expensive for coal to be produced there. So coal was very
that they want to do in their school.